2335 docs best practices (#3551)
zarf-dev/zarf: site/src/content/docs/best-practices/upgrading-zarf.mdx

---
title: "Upgrading Zarf"
---

> Optimally the version of Zarf performing the `package create` and `package deploy` operations aligns to the version of [Init Package]() that is installed within the cluster.

Reviewer: Missing the [Init Package] link here

# Upgrading the Init Package

Upgrading the init package is a bit different from upgrading a regular application package because it establishes your cluster's foundational infrastructure. Follow these steps to upgrade your init package:

## 1. Obtain the Updated Init Package

- **Default Package:** If you're using the default package, run the following command to fetch the latest init package (if it's not already present locally):

  ```bash
  zarf tools download-init
  ```

  - **Validate:** This will download the associated init package to your current working directory unless `--output-directory` is specified.

- **Manual:** The Init Package can also be manually downloaded from the Github releases to a storage location of your choice.

  ```bash
  VERSION="<target version>"; ARCH="<target architecture>"; curl -LO https://github.com/zarf-dev/zarf/releases/download/${VERSION}/zarf-init-${ARCH}-${VERSION}.tar.zst
  ```

## 2. Re-initialize the cluster

- **Init:** The init process can be executed to upgrade a cluster from one version to another.

  ```bash
  zarf init --confirm
  ```

> - **Deploy:** The Init Package can also be deployed directly with `package deploy` - allowing for explicit deployment specification.

Reviewer: I think it's worth mentioning here that custom init packages can be deployed this way

Author: agreed!

  ```bash
  zarf package deploy <zarf-init-package tarball> --confirm
  ```

  **Note:** The use of package deploy for zarf init operations will not expose any configuration for external git/registry options.

## 3. Validate Zarf Infrastructure

> - **Validate:** Ensure the following zarf resources are healthy:
>   - Registry if deployed
>   - Agent pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Validate:** Ensure the following zarf resources are healthy:
  - Registry
  - Agent pods
  - Git server if deployed
```
In the default init package the Git Server is an optional component, but the rest of the services are required.

Author: The registry wouldn't be deployed is an external registry is used correct?

Reviewer: Ah yeah totally forgot about that

- **Manual:** The Init Package can also be manually downloaded from the Github releases to a storage location of your choice.

  ```bash
  VERSION="<target version>"; ARCH="<target architecture>"; curl -LO https://github.com/zarf-dev/zarf/releases/download/${VERSION}/zarf-init-${ARCH}-${VERSION}.tar.zst
  ```

## 2. Re-initialize the cluster

- **Init:** The init process can be executed to upgrade a cluster from one version to another.

  ```bash
  zarf init --confirm
  ```

- **Deploy:** Init Packages can also be deployed directly with `package deploy` - allowing for explicit deployment specification and the use of [custom init packages](/tutorials/7-custom-init-packages).

  ```bash
  zarf package deploy <zarf-init-package tarball> --confirm
  ```

  **Note:** The use of package deploy for zarf init operations will not expose any configuration for external git/registry options.

## 3. Validate Zarf Infrastructure

- **Validate:** Ensure the following zarf resources are healthy:
  - Registry (if deployed)
  - Agent pods
  - Git server (if deployed)

  ```bash
  zarf tools kubectl get pods -n zarf
  ```

# Special Considerations

> After the original `zarf init` has taken place - any following initialize actions will use the same `secret` for obtaining information provided by any `zarf init` flags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the original `zarf init` has taken place - any following initialize actions will use the values in the `zarf-state` secret in the `zarf` namespace to obtain information for Zarf infrastructure such as the registry. For example, the `--registry-pull-password` flag is ignored on subsequent runs.
```
Thoughts on adding some more detail here? I think specifying that this is for flags related infrastructure and not flags like `--components` would make this more clear.
